---
layout: post
comments: true
title:  "10 tips for high school students wanting to be web designers/developers-2016 edition"
date:   2016-07-12 22:07:59 -0400
categories: personal
permalink: /high-school-student-web-tips-2016/
excerpt: Tips for high schoolers wanting to be web designers/developers while looking at the state of technology education and hiring in 2016.
og-image: high-school-2016-image.jpg
---
<p>My click to tweet tutorial has been doing pretty well in terms of appearing early in search results. When my <a href="http://kaidez.com/github-tutorial-update/">Git tutorial</a> started to do the same, I tweaked it to give it an SEO push and have seen some positive ressults.</p><p>Therefore, I&#8217;m doing the same thing with the click to tweet tutorial.</p><h2>The Changes</h2><p>A complete, general list of the changes&#8230;</p><ul><li class="post-list-item"><strong>refactor the code to use the window.location property:</strong> if the links that get Tweeted contain things like query strings and hash tags, those things were previously removed with a regular expression. This doesn&#8217;t work on a global level so I&#8217;m now cleaning up the link with <code>window.location</code> property. It gets the job done in all situations and I walk through various ways to use it.</li><li class="post-list-item"><strong>lots of copy adjustments:</strong> there a little less copy than before and the content itself looks different. Also, I updated the title and meta description and get to the point quicker in this update.</li><li class="post-list-item"><strong>shorten the code:</strong> the previous code was 16 lines long and worked, but I reduced it to 12. That&#8217;s not a HUGE reduction; however, the code runs faster than it did before.</li><li class="post-list-item"><strong>scrape the open graph content:</strong> I updated the meta open graph stuff so I had to scrape it with <a href="https://developers.facebook.com/tools/debug/">Facebook&#8217;s Sharing Debugger</a> so those updates would actually appear.</li></ul><h2>Using the SEO Plugin</h2><p>The BIG reason I&#8217;m doing all this was that my WordPress-based site uses <a href="https://wordpress.org/plugins/wordpress-seo/">Yoast&#8217;s WordPress SEO plugin</a>. The plugin has always been great, but it&#8217;s REALLY improved over the last few months.</p><p>Along with its great SEO analyzing engine, it also includes a Readability analyzing engine. The latter gives tips on how readable a post is&#8230;I followed its advice and made a few adjustments to the text&#8230;and all is good.</p><p>Read the click to tweet tutorial