---
title: "I'm Going To MIX11/Las Vegas!"
date: 2011-03-02
layout: layouts/post.njk
excerpt: Kai Gittens, (kaidez) will be at Microsoft's Mix11 Conference in Las Vegas in April 2011 and will be at the HTML5/CSS3 and jQuery bootcamps
permalink: /mix11/
image: mix11-header-image.jpg
tags: [personal]
secondary_tags: ["conferences"]
category: Personal
---
<p style="margin: 30px 0 40px; border-bottom: black 1px solid;">
<em>(Author's note - August 2025: This a diary-like post I wrote announcing my plans for attending Microsoft's MIX11 conference in 2011.  The conference was the first web developer conference I attending it and it has special meaning to me. So exists for no other reason than historical perspective. -k)</em></p>
On April 11th, my coworker Max, two other developers from work and I will be attending be attending <a href="https://web.archive.org/web/20110717222010/http://live.visitmix.com/">Microsoft’s annual MIX conference, dubbed MIX11</a>.

Don’t hate the player: yes, it’s in Vegas and we’re staying at the gorgeous Mandalay Bay, but everyone I know that’s been to past MIX conferences say that from a programming standpoint, they learned at least one new thing that helped them in their career. Whether via the daily coding events or the Q&A sessions with industry experts, they all left knowing more than they did when the arrived.

Best of all, we’re flying out a day early for their one-day rapid-fire coding workshops, or bootcamps. There are two bootcamp sessions: one in the morning and one in the afternoon. There are five bootcamps per session and I can take a total of two; one per session.

I’m attending these two bootcamps…

**HTML5/CSS3 with Stephanie (Sullivan) Rewis of W3Conversions** – I don’t know much about Rewis but she’s at a Microsoft conference running a very intense class about a very hot topic in the web dev world. So let’s assume she’s good. Plus, how can I have this blog and *not* go to this?!?!?!

**jQuery with Joe Marini of Microsoft** – If you’re a web developer, *this* guy needs no introduction. While he’s a jack-of-all-trades in terms of web development, Marini is tied with Dori Smith for the #1 JavaScript Guru title. So a jQuery coding session run by this guy is a *really* good thing!

And yes, I’ll slip in a few hands of blackjack.

Anyone else going?
<script type="application/ld+json">
{
    "@context": "https://schema.org",
    "@type": "TechArticle",
    "headline": "I'm Going To MIX11/Las Vegas!",
    "description": "A diary entry-like post I wrote announcing my plans for attending Microsoft's MIX11 conference in 2011.",
    "author": {
        "@type": "Person",
        "name": "Kai Gittens",
		    "url" : "http://kaidez.com/"
    },
    "datePublished": "2010-11-08",
    "dateModified": "2025-08-27"
}
</script>